documentation for in-place migrations with x/upgrade module (#8967)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/building-modules/upgrade.md

<!--
order: 13
-->

> # Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# In-Place Store Migrations
```

(yeah, my bad, I know I gave you that title in our 1:1)

> The Upgrade module allows your modules to smoothly transition to new versions with breaking changes. This document outlines how to build modules to take advantage of this functionality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In-place store migrations allow your modules to smoothly transition to new versions with breaking changes. This document outlines how to build modules to take advantage of this functionality. 
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pre-requisite Readings

- [In-Place Store Migration](../core-concepts/upgrade.md) {prereq}
```

What do you think about adding this section? `{prereq}` renders in a special way in vuepress, e.g.  http://docs.cosmos.network/v0.42/building-modules/query-services.html on the right side.

> # Consensus Version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Consensus Version
```

Only the title should be `#`

> In order to successfully upgrade your existing modules, your `AppModule`s must implement the function `ConsensusVersion() uint64`. The `uint64` returned will serve as the consensus version and should be hard coded by the module developer. This number will serve as a state-breaking version of each app module. The initial version *MUST* be set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to successfully upgrade your existing modules, your `AppModule`s must implement the function `ConsensusVersion() uint64`. The `uint64` returned will serve as the consensus version and should be hard coded by the module developer. This number will serve as a state-breaking version of each app module, so *MUST* be incremented on each consensus-breaking change introduced by the module. The initial version *MUST* be set to 1.
```

# Registering Migrations

To register the functionality that takes place during a module upgrade, we must register which migrations we want to take place. This takes place in the `Configurator` via the `RegisterMigration` method. The `AppModule`s have a reference to the configurator in the `RegisterServices` method. We can register a number of migrations here, however, if more than one migration script is registered, it is important they are listed in increasing order. Additionally, we must ensure there are enough migrations that will lead to the desired consensus version. For example, if we wanted to migrate to version 3 of a module, we would need to register a separate migration for both version 1 and 2 as shown below.

```golang
func (am AppModule) RegisterServices(cfg module.Configurator) {
    // --snip--
    cfg.RegisterMigration(types.ModuleName, 1, func(ctx sdk.Context) error {
        // Perform in-place store migrations from ConsensusVersion 1 to 2.
    })
     cfg.RegisterMigration(types.ModuleName, 2, func(ctx sdk.Context) error {
        // Perform in-place store migrations from ConsensusVersion 2 to 3.
    })
}
```

> Since these migrations are functions that need access to a Keeper's store, we use a wrapper around the keepers called `Migrator`. An example of this can be found (here)[https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/bank/keeper/migrations.go]. In addition to the `Migrator` wrapper, we also define our migration scripts. More on that below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since these migrations are functions that need access to a Keeper's store, we use a wrapper around the keepers called `Migrator`. An example of this can be found here:

+++ https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/6ac8898fec9bd7ea2c1e5c79e0ed0c3f827beb55/x/bank/keeper/migrations.go#L8-L21

In addition to the `Migrator` wrapper, we also define our migration scripts. More on that below.
```

vuepress has this `+++` markdown syntax which allows pasting a sniippet of code in the docs. I think it could be useful here for module developers, wdyt?

Also, we try to put permalinks in docs, so that links don't break.

# Writing Migration Scripts

In order to define the functionality that takes place during an upgrade, we will write a migration script. Since migration scripts will manipulate legacy code, we place these functions in a `legacy/` directory. For example, if we wanted to write migration scripts for a module named `bank`, we would place the functions in `x/bank/legacy/`. We recommend the following naming convention for these functions:

```golang
// Migrating bank module from version 1 to 2
func (m Migrator) Migrate1to2(ctx sdk.Context) error {
	return v043bank.MigrateStore(ctx, m.keeper.storeKey) // v043bank is package `x/bank/legacy/v043`.
}
```

> If you would like to see example code of changes implemented in a migration, you can check out the code [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/36f68eb9e041e20a5bb47e216ac5eb8b91f95471/x/bank/legacy/v043/store.go#L41-L62). For context, this introduced migrations of the bank store that updated addresses to be prefixed by their length in bytes as perscribed in (ADR-028)[https://docs.cosmos.network/master/architecture/adr-028-public-key-addresses.html].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to see example code of changes implemented in a migration, you can check out the code [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/36f68eb9e041e20a5bb47e216ac5eb8b91f95471/x/bank/legacy/v043/store.go#L41-L62). For context, this introduced migrations of the bank store that updated addresses to be prefixed by their length in bytes as perscribed in (ADR-028)[../architecture/adr-028-public-key-addresses.md].
```

## Writing Migration Scripts

In order to define the functionality that takes place during an upgrade, we will write a migration script. Since migration scripts will manipulate legacy code, we place these functions in a `legacy/` directory. For example, if we wanted to write migration scripts for a module named `bank`, we would place the functions in `x/bank/legacy/`. We recommend the following naming convention for these functions:

```golang
// Migrating bank module from version 1 to 2
func (m Migrator) Migrate1to2(ctx sdk.Context) error {
	return v043bank.MigrateStore(ctx, m.keeper.storeKey) // v043bank is package `x/bank/legacy/v043`.
}
```

If you would like to see example code of changes implemented in a migration, you can check out the code [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/36f68eb9e041e20a5bb47e216ac5eb8b91f95471/x/bank/legacy/v043/store.go#L41-L62). For context, this introduced migrations of the bank store that updated addresses to be prefixed by their length in bytes as perscribed in (ADR-028)[../architecture/adr-028-public-key-addresses.md].

## Adding New Modules In Upgrades

> When introducing a new module to your application during an upgrade, your `AppModule` must begin at consensus version 0. When an upgrade is being executed, all modules with consensus versions set to 0 will be recognized as new modules. This will result in the new module's `InitGenesis` function executing. This allows new modules to setup some inital state. The result of this will set the `AppModule`s consensus version to `1`.

Author: I decided to rewrite this paragraph. Let me know what you think of the changes. `all modules with consensus versions set to 0` I feel like this detail might not really be necessary

> If your module does not require any initial state, you do not need to implement any `InitGenesis`. The `InitGenesis` will result in a no-op, but still upgrade your consensus version to `1` for future upgrades. 

Reviewer: I would also add a paragraph like this:

---

If you wish to overwrite the default behavior of running InitGenesis during an upgrade for new modules, make sure to pass the latest `ConsensusVersion` of the new module into the return `module.VersionMap`. This will then skip running InitGenesis for the module:

```go
// Let's say foo is a new module
import foo "github.com/my/module/foo"

app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap)  (module.VersionMap, error) {
    // We make sure to set foo's version to the latest ConsensusVersion in the VersionMap.
    // This will skip running InitGenesis on Foo
    vm["foo"] = foo.AppModule{}.ConsensusVersion()

    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, vm)
})
```

Using the same method, you can also run InitGenesis on your new module with a custom genesis state:

```go
app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap)  (module.VersionMap, error) {
    vm["foo"] = foo.AppModule{}.ConsensusVersion()

    // Run custom InitGenesis for foo
    app.mm["foo"].InitGenesis(ctx, app.appCodec, myCustomGenesisState)

    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, vm)
})
```
